Secretion of somatostatin by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Correct processing of an alpha-factor-somatostatin hybrid.

Somatostatin is a 14-amino acid peptide hormone that is proteolytically processed from its precursor, prosomatostatin, by a paired-basic-specific protease localized in the Golgi apparatus and secretory vesicles. Yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae MAT alpha) synthesize an analogous peptide hormone precursor, pro-alpha-factor, that contains tandem repeats of alpha factor (13 amino acids) flanked by spacers that include paired basic residues. To investigate the role of these two pro regions in mediating intracellular transport and processing, cloned genes specific for preprosomatostatin and prepro-alpha-factor were used to generate recombinants encoding hybrids between the alpha-factor pro region (amino-terminal) and somatostatin (carboxyl-terminal). These recombinants were inserted into yeast expression vectors under control of either the native alpha-factor promoter or the inducible yeast PHO5 (acid phosphatase) promoter. Yeast transformed with these plasmids expressed the hybrid messenger RNAs constitutively (alpha-factor promoter) or when induced in phosphate-deficient medium (PHO5 promoter). Radioimmunoassay of culture media revealed the secretion of up to 200 ng of immunoreactive somatostatin/10(7) cells. Metabolic labeling with [35S]cysteine, followed by immunoprecipitation with anti-somatostatin antibodies revealed two forms of hybrid precursor intracellularly, one of Mr 25,000, containing core carbohydrates, and a second of Mr 11,000, which was unglycosylated. Translation of mRNA extracted from these transformants in the wheat germ cell-free system revealed that the Mr 11,000 form was the primary translation product, whereas the Mr 25,000 species could be generated in vitro by inclusion of mammalian rough microsomes. The secreted immunoreactive material was shown to be authentic somatostatin by high pressure liquid chromatography analysis and protein sequencing. These results demonstrate that the yeast processing enzymes recognize these chimeric precursors, resulting in the secretion of the mature peptide hormone.