Amino-terminal processing of mutant forms of yeast iso-1-cytochrome c. The specificities of methionine aminopeptidase and acetyltransferase.

Amino-terminal processing in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae has been investigated by examining numerous mutationally altered forms of iso-1-cytochrome c. Amino-terminal residues of methionine were retained in sequences having penultimate residues of arginine, asparagine, glutamine, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, and methionine; in contrast, the amino-terminal methionine residues were exercised from residues of alanine, glycine, and threonine and were partially excised from residues of valine. The results suggest the occurrence of a yeast aminopeptidase that removes amino-terminal residues of methionine when they precede certain amino acids. A systematic search of the literature for amino-terminal sequences formed at initiation sites suggests the hypothetical yeast aminopeptidase usually has the same specificity as the amino peptidase from bacteria and higher eukaryotes. Our results and the results from the literature search suggest that the aminopeptidase cleaves amino-terminal methionine when it precedes residues of alanine, glycine, proline, serine, threonine, and valine but not when it precedes residues of arginine, asparagine, aspartic acid, glutamine glutamic acid, isoleucine, leucine, lysine, or methionine. In contrast to the normal iso-1-cytochrome c and in contrast to the majority of the mutationally altered proteins, certain forms were acetylated including the following sequences: acetyl(Ac)-Met-Ile-Arg-, Ac-Met-Ile-Lys, Ac-Met-Met-Asn-, and Ac-Met-Asn-Asn-. We suggest yeast contains acetyltransferases that acetylates these mutant forms of iso-1-cytochromes c because their amino-terminal regions resemble the amino-terminal regions of natural occurring proteins which are normally acetylated. The lack of acetylation of closely related sequences suggest that the hypothetical acetyltransferases are specific for certain amino-terminal sequences and that the 3 amino-terminal residues may play a critical role in determining these specificities.