Effects of oxygen concentration on the expression of cytochrome c and cytochrome c oxidase genes in yeast.

Oxygen is an important environmental regulator for the transcription of several genes in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, but it is not yet clear how this yeast or other eukaryotes actually sense oxygen. To begin to address this we have examined the effects of oxygen concentration on the expression of several nuclear genes (CYC1, CYC7, COX4, COX5a, COX5b, COX6, COX7, COX8, and COX9) for proteins of the terminal portion of the respiratory chain. COX5b and CYC7 are hypoxic genes; the rest are aerobic genes. We have found that the level of expression of these genes is determined by oxygen concentration per se and not merely the presence or absence of oxygen and that each of these genes has a low oxygen threshold (0. 5-1 microM O2) for expression. For some aerobic genes (COX4, COX5a, COX7, COX8, and COX9) there is a gradual decline in expression between 200 microM O2 (air) and their oxygen threshold. Below this threshold expression drops precipitously. For others (COX5a and CYC1) the level of expression is nearly constant between 200 microM O2 and their threshold and then drops off. The hypoxic genes COX5b and CYC7 are not expressed until the oxygen concentration is below 0.5 microM O2. These studies have also revealed that COX5a and CYC1, the genes for the aerobic isoforms of cytochrome c oxidase subunit V and cytochrome c, and COX5b and CYC7, the genes for the hypoxic isoforms of cytochrome c oxidase subunit V and cytochrome c, are coexpressed at a variety of oxygen concentrations and switch on or off at extremely low oxygen concentrations. By shifting cells from one oxygen concentration to another we have found that aerobic genes are induced faster than hypoxic genes and that transcripts from both types of gene are turned over quickly. These findings have important implications for cytochrome c oxidase function and biogenesis and for models of oxygen sensing in yeast.