Proton NMR comparison of the Saccharomyces cerevisiae ferricytochrome c isozyme-1 monomer and covalent disulfide dimer.

Proton NMR studies of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (bakers yeast) isozyme-1 monomer and dimer ferricytochrome c have been carried out. The dimer is formed via a disulfide bridge between the Cys-102 residues of monomer proteins. Nuclear Overhauser effect (NOE) experiments have led to resonance assignments for many of the heme and axial ligand (Met-80; His-18) protons in both protein forms. Resonances of the following amino acids have also been assigned in both forms: Phe-10; Pro-30; Phe-82; Trp-59; Leu-68. The proton NOE connectivity patterns of the monomer of yeast isozyme-1 ferricytochrome c are similar to those of horse, tuna, and yeast isozyme-2 ferricytochromes c, even though the observed hyperfine resonance spectra are significantly different for the various cytochromes. The pattern of dimer proton hyperfine resonances is distinct from the isozyme-1 monomer pattern, which indicates that the formation of a disulfide bridge via Cys-102 is detected at the heme site, approximately 10 A distant. It appears that a specific structural change is induced upon dimerization, which, in turn, causes specific perturbations in the vicinity of the heme. However, the general features of the NOE connectivity pattern in the dimer are the same as for the monomer indicating that dimerization does not result in drastic structural disruption. Furthermore, the 1H NMR spectrum of the dimer can be mimicked by the monomer form that results when the -SH group of Cys-102 is chemically modified with certain types of bulky, or hydrophilic reagents (i.e. 5,5'-dithiobis[2-nitrobenzoate], indicating that perturbations of the yeast isozyme-1 ferricytochrome c proton resonance spectrum observed upon dimerization are essentially due to changes in intramolecular, rather than intermolecular, interactions. These results suggest that a possible regulatory site for yeast isozyme-1 cytochrome c exists at position 102, which could conceivably have a physiological role in altering the conformation of the molecule.