Carbohydrate structure of yeast invertase. Demonstration of a form with only core oligosaccharides and a form with completed polysaccharide chains.

Invertase, extracted from broken cells of Saccharomyces cerevisiae X-2180 mm2 mannan mutant, was separated into a fraction insoluble in 75% ammonium sulfate (P75 invertase, 36% carbohydrate) and a soluble fraction (S75 invertase, 53% carbohydrate). The latter reacted with antibodies specific for the alpha 1 leads to 6-linked mannose of the mannoprotein outer chain, whereas the P75 invertase failed to react with this antiserum although it did react with serum against terminal alpha 1 leads to 3-linked mannose units that are characteristic of the mannoprotein core. A bacterial endo alpha 1 leads to 6-mannanase removed the outer chains from the S75 invertase and converted it to a form that was similar in electrophoretic and immunochemical properties to the P75 invertase, whereas the endomannanase had little effect on the latter invertase. The results suggest that the P75 invertase is a form of the enzyme to which only the core oligosaccharide units had been added, and the S75 invertase represents an enzyme fraction to which the polysaccharide outer chains were also attached. A strong anomeric PMR signal for unsubstituted alpha 1 leads to 6-linked mannose in the S75 invertase, and a much reduced signal in the P75 invertase and endomannanase-digested S75 invertase, support these conclusions. Endo-N-acetyl-beta-glucosaminidase digestion of the S75 and P75 invertases, as well as of a purified wild type yeast invertase, produced an apparently identical series of 3 to 4 carbohydrate-containing proteins that were separable by polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis in sodium dodecyl sulfate but that migrated as a single band on isoelectric focusing. The bands ranged from about 63,000 to 69,000 daltons and differed by the size of one or more carbohydrate core units each of 15 mannoses and 1 N-acetylglucosamine. The results suggest that the external invertase molecules contain some core units without attached outer chains, and that the cells contain a precursor form of the enzyme to which only the core units have been added. In support of this conclusion, PMR spectra and chromatographic patterns show that the core fragments from the P75, S75, and wild type invertases are essentially identical.